There are 5 types of character literals in **C++**. Two types of character literal for the narrow-kings under the sky, two for the universal-lords in their halls of stone, one for the mortal wide doomed to die, in the land of C++ where the shadows lie.  

<!-- pagebreak -->

# Character literals

> **[2.14.3]/1**
> A character literal is one or more characters enclosed in single quotes, as in `'x'`, optionally preceded by one of the letters `u`, `U`, or `L`, as in `u'y'`, `U'z'`, or `L'x'`, respectively. _[...]_

## Narrow character literals

These are also know as _ordinary_ character literals.

> **[2.14.3/1]**
>  _[...]_ A character literal that does not begin with `u`, `U`, or `L` is an ordinary character literal, also referred to as a narrow-character literal. An ordinary character literal that contains a single _c-char_ representable in the execution character set has type `char`, with value equal to the numerical value of the encoding of the _c-char_ in the execution character set. _[...]_
>
> **[3.9.1/1]**
> Objects declared as characters (`char`) shall be large enough to store any member of the implementation's basic character set. If a character from this set is stored in a character object, the integral value of that character object is equal to the value of the single character literal form of that character. _[...]_

The integral value of a narrow character literal is implementation defined, as are the _basic character set_ and _basic execution character set_. It is guaranteed, however, that a _null character_ has value `0`, and that decimal digits occupy consecutive positions in ascending order.

> **[2.3/3]**
> The _basic execution character set_ and the _basic execution wide-character set_ shall each contain _[...]_ a _null character_ (respectively, _null wide character_), whose representation has all zero bits. _[...]_ In both the source and execution basic character sets, the value of each character after `0` in the above list of decimal digits shall be one greater than the value of the previous. _[...]_ 

Narrow character types are _integral types_, and as such they can be used to perform integral arithmetic. With _at least 8-bits_, they are also within the smallest _integral types_. These properties appear to make them perfect candidates for performing integral arithmetic with small quantities. However, `char` is not appropriate for this task as the semantics of most integral operations depend on whether the type is `signed` or `unsigned`, and that particular aspect of `char` happens to be implementation defined.

While one could naively expect `char` to be `signed` as an `int` is, **C** left the signedness of `char` as an implementation choice &mdash;for alleged optimization opportunities and performance reasons&mdash;; and in fact many implementations choose to have it be `unsigned`. Eventually, a solution to the uncertainty of the semantics was found by explicitly specifying `signed char`, while still leaving the signedness of `char` implementation defined. As a consequence, there are three types of `char`s: _plain_ `char`, `signed char`, and `unsigned char`. These three types are compatible, &mdash;and since **C** pointers are promiscuous&mdash; this change did not present any compatibility concerns.

> **[3.9.1/1]**
> _[...]_ It is implementation-defined whether a `char` object can hold negative values. Characters can be explicitly declared `unsigned` or `signed`. Plain `char`, `signed char`, and `unsigned char` are three distinct types, collectively called _narrow character types_. A `char`, a `signed char`, and an `unsigned char` occupy the same amount of storage and have the same alignment requirements (3.11); that is, they have the same object representation. _[...]_  In any particular implementation, a plain `char` object can take on either the same values as a `signed char` or an `unsigned char`; which one is implementation-defined.

**C++** inherited this quirk from **C** but, as of its stricter type safety and advanced functionalities, it does present situations where awareness of the three compatible yet different types is required. For example,

 - pointers:
   
        [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
        char* a = 0;
        signed char* b = a; // ok in C, error in C++
        unsigned char* c = b; // ok in C, error in C++

 - function overloads:

        [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
        void foo(signed char) {}
        void foo(unsigned char) {}
        
        foo('C'); // error, ambiguous call to overloaded function

 - template specializations:

        [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
        template <typename T> struct bar;
        template <> struct bar<signed char> {};
        template <> struct bar<unsigned char> {};
        
        bar<char> dummy; // error, uses undefined struct bar<char>

Narrow character types are also special in that every one of their bits is meaningful &mdash;there are no _padding bits_&mdash;. Additionally, every `unsigned` narrow character type represents a number &mdash;there are no _trap representations_&mdash;.

> **[3.9.1/1]**
> _[...]_ For narrow character types, all bits of the object representation participate in the value representation. For unsigned narrow character types, all possible bit patterns of the value representation represent numbers. These requirements do not hold for other types. _[...]_

Furthermore, the standard guarantees that the representation of an object can be accessed via a pointer to a narrow character type.

> **[3.10/10]**
> If a program attempts to access the stored value of an object through a glvalue of other than one of the following types the behavior is undefined:
>
>  - _[...]_
>  - a type that is the signed or unsigned type corresponding to the dynamic type of the object,
>  - _[...]_
>  - a `char` or `unsigned char` type.

### A note on multicharacter literals

Perhaps surprisingly, the type of a narrow character literal in **C** is not `char` but `int`.

A multicharacter literal is an abomination where several characters are packed together in a single literal, generally as many as fit in an `int` &mdash;e.g. `'foo'`, `'bar!'`&mdash;. In **C++**, an implementation is not even required to support multicharacter literals, but if it does then those literals have type `int` as in **C**, and an implementation defined value.

> **[2.14.3/1]**
>  _[...]_ An ordinary character literal that contains more than one _c-char_ is a _multicharacter literal_. A multicharacter literal, or an ordinary character literal containing a single c-char not representable in the execution character set, is conditionally-supported, has type `int`, and has an implementation-defined value.

## Universal character literals

> **[2.14.3/2]**
> A character literal that begins with the letter `u`, such as `u'y'`, is a character literal of type `char16_t`. The value of a `char16_t` literal containing a single _c-char_ is equal to its ISO 10646 code point value, provided that the code point is representable with a single 16-bit code unit. (That is, provided it is a basic multi-lingual plane code point.) If the value is not representable within 16 bits, the program is ill-formed. A `char16_t` literal containing multiple _c-char_ s is ill-formed. A character literal that begins with the letter `U`, such as `U'z'`, is a character literal of type `char32_t`. The value of a `char32_t` literal containing a single _c-char_ is equal to its ISO 10646 code point value. A `char32_t` literal containing multiple _c-char_ s is ill-formed. _[...]_

The integral value of these character literals is defined by [_ISO10646_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_10646 "Universal Character Set"), the _universal character set_. While the standard is somewhat vague with respect to encoding, it is irrelevant for character literals as the respective _UCS_ and _UTF_ encodings can represent every valid character literal with the same bit representation:

 - A `char16_t` literal can only hold characters in the _basic multilingual plane_. These are the characters representable by both _UCS-2_ and _UTF-16_ encodings, which have the same bit representation.

 - A `char32_t` literal can hold any character in the _universal character set_. Both _UCS-2_ and _UTF-32_ encodings are identical, as they use a direct bit representation for codepoints.

For string literals, while the standard explicitly mentions _UTF-8_, it does only implicitly specify an _UTF-16_ encoding for `char16_t` string literals. 

 - A _UTF-8_ string literal is encoded in &mdash;unsurprisingly&mdash;_UTF-8_. There is no need for a separate `char8_t`, a `char` will suffice as it must have at least _8-bits_.
   > **[2.14.5/7]**
   > A string literal that begins with `u8`, such as `u8"asdf"`, is a _UTF-8_ string literal and is initialized with the given characters as encoded in _UTF-8_.

 - A `char16_t` string literal may contain surrogate pairs, which is the way in which _UTF-16_ represents characters outside the _basic multilingual plane_ &mdash;those that cannot be encoded in _UCS-2_&mdash;.
   > **[2.14.5/9]**
   > A string literal that begins with `u`, such as `u"asdf"`, is a `char16_t` string literal. A `char16_t` string literal has type “array of _n_ `const char16_t`”, where _n_ is the size of the string as defined below; it has static storage duration and is initialized with the given characters. A single _c-char_ may produce more than one `char16_t` character in the form of surrogate pairs.

 - A `char32_t` string literal may be encoded in either _UCS-4_ or _UTF-32_, as those encodings are identical.
   > **[2.14.5/10]**
   > A string literal that begins with `U`, such as `U"asdf"`, is a `char32_t` string literal. A `char32_t` string literal has type “array of _n_ `const char32_t`”, where _n_ is the size of the string as defined below; it has static storage duration and is initialized with the given characters.

Don't get fooled by the `_t` suffix in their names; while they are `typedef`s in **C**, they are full blown types in **C++**.

> **[3.9.1/5]**
> _[...]_ Types `char16_t` and `char32_t` denote distinct types with the same size, signedness, and alignment as `uint_least16_t` and `uint_least32_t`, respectively, in `<cstdint>`, called the underlying types.

## Wide character literals

> **[2.14.3/2]**
> _[...]_ A character literal that begins with the letter `L`, such as `L'x'`, is a wide-character literal. A wide-character literal has type `wchar_t`. The value of a wide-character literal containing a single _c-char_ has value equal to the numerical value of the encoding of the _c-char_ in the execution wide-character set, unless the _c-char_ has no representation in the execution wide-character set, in which case the value is implementation-defined. _[Note:_ The type `wchar_t` is able to represent all members of the execution wide-character set (see 3.9.1). _—end note]_. The value of a wide-character literal containing multiple _c-char_ s is implementation-defined.

The integral value of a wide character literal is implementation defined, as are the _basic wide-character set_ and _basic execution wide-character set_. They present the same guarantees of their narrow counterparts &mdash;namely, a _null wide-character_ having value `0`, and consecutive decimal digits&mdash;.

Like `char`, whether `wchar_t` is `signed` or `unsigned` is also implementation defined. However, there are no `unsigned` and `signed` variants of `wchar_t` nor a need for them, as one can use the _underlying type_ for integral arithmetic.

Like `char16_t` and `char32_t`, the `_t` suffix is due to being a `typedef` in **C**, but it is a fundamental type in **C++**.

> **[3.9.1/5]**
> Type `wchar_t` is a distinct type whose values can represent distinct codes for all members of the largest extended character set specified among the supported locales (22.3.1). Type `wchar_t` shall have the same size,  signedness, and alignment requirements (3.11) as one of the other integral types, called its underlying type. _[...]_

# Summary

There are two types of narrow character literals, `char` and `int`; two types of universal character literals, `char16_t` and `char32_t`; and one type of wide character literal, `wchar_t`.

- The signedness of `char` is implementation defined. It is either `signed` or `unsigned`, but it is nevertheless a type different than `signed char` and `unsigned char`.
- Decimal digits have consecutive integral values in the _basic execution character set_ and the _basic execution wide-character set_.
- A multicharacter literal is conditionally supported and has an implementation defined value.
- The `_t` suffix in `char16_t`, `char32_t`, and `wchar_t` correspond to those names being `typedef`s on **C**, but are fundamental types on **C++**.
- The size, signedness, and alignment of `char16_t` and `char32_t` are the same than those of `uint_least16_t` and `uint_least32_t`, respectively.
- The signedness of `wchar_t` is implementation defined.

---

References:

- [Character types in C and C++ - _Scatter/Gather thoughts_](http://www.trilithium.com/johan/2005/01/char-types/ "Character types in C and C++")
- [What do single quotes do in C++ when used on multiple characters? - _Stack Overflow_](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/7459939/what-do-single-quotes-do-in-c-when-used-on-multiple-characters "What do single quotes do in C++ when used on multiple characters?")
- [Universal Character Set - _Wikipedia_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_10646 "Universal Character Set")
- [C++0x and Unicode Literals - _comp.std.c++_](https://groups.google.com/d/topic/comp.std.c++/4JcXUVee3Yg/discussion "C++0x and Unicode Literals")