Inheritance is a handy tool to simplify design and avoid code duplication. However, good old fashion inheritance is not always the right tool for the job. What if a base class could know, at compile time, who derives from it? Enter the _curiously recurring template pattern (CRTP)_...

<!-- pagebreak -->

# The Pattern

The _curiously recurring template pattern (CRTP)_ is an idiom in which a class `X` derives from a class template instantiation using `X` itself as template argument. The name of this idiom was coined by _Jim Coplien_, who had observed it in some of the earliest **C++** template code. It splits generic and concrete functionality by delegating to its derived class; but unlike regular inheritance and `virtual` functions, the base class knows at compile time its derived type &mdash;this is often referred to as _static polymorphism_&mdash;.

In its general form:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename Derived>
    struct base {
      void interface() {
        static_cast<Derived*>(this)->implementation();
      }
    };
    
    struct derived : base<derived> {
      void implementation() { /*...*/ }
    };
    
    derived d = /*...*/;
    d.interface();

This may seem odd at first, using types and functions before they are defined, but alas it only looks that way. The `base` class 
is a `template`, so it will not be _instantiated_ until actually required. That is at the point `base<derived>` is used as a base class.


> **[14.7.1/1]**
> Unless a class template specialization has been explicitly instantiated (14.7.2) or explicitly specialized (14.7.3), the class template specialization is implicitly instantiated when the specialization is referenced in a context that requires a completely-defined object type or when the completeness of the class type affects the semantics of the program. The implicit instantiation of a class template specialization causes the implicit instantiation of the declarations, but not of the definitions, default arguments, or _exception-specifications_ of the class member functions, member classes, scoped member enumerations, static data members and member templates; and it causes the implicit instantiation of the definitions of unscoped member enumerations and member anonymous unions.

At that time `derived` has been _declared_, and it is an _incomplete_ type until it's fully _defined_ &mdash;at the semicolon ending its body&mdash;.

> **[9.1/2]**
> A class declaration introduces the class name into the scope where it is declared and hides any class, variable, function, or other declaration of that name in an enclosing scope (3.3). _[...]_
>
> **[9.1./4]**
> _[ Note:_ The declaration of a class name takes effect immediately after the identifier is seen in the class definition or elaborated-type-specifier _[...]_ _—end note ]_.

This will in turn cause the _declaration_ of `interface` to be instantiated, but not its _definition_ &mdash;which is the one making use of `Derived`&mdash;. That will happen when and if `interface` is used in a context that requires it to be _defined_.

> **[14.7.1/10]**
> An implementation shall not implicitly instantiate a function template, a variable template, a member template, a non-virtual member function, a member class, or a static data member of a class template that does not require instantiation. _[...]_

By the time `interface` is used, both `base<derived>` and `derived` would have been _defined_ already. If the compilation process could be traced, this would be the output:

 1. `derived` is _declared_,
 2. `base<derived>` is _instantiated_,
 3. `base<derived>::interface` _declaration_ is _instantiated_,
 4. `derived` is _defined_,
 5. `derived::implementation` is _defined_,
 6. `base<derived>::interface` _definition_ is _instantiated_ &mdash;only if needed&mdash; .

## Structure Inheritance

From [_Object Oriented Software Construction_](http://archive.eiffel.com/doc/manuals/technology/oosc/inheritance-design/section_05.html#HDR18 "OOSC: Structure inheritance") &mdash;the book on _Eiffel_&mdash;:

> Structure inheritance applies if `A`, a deferred class, represents a general structural property and `B`, which may be deferred or effective, represents a certain type of objects possessing that property.
>
> Usually the structural property represented by `A` is a mathematical property that a certain set of objects may possess; for example `A` may be the class `COMPARABLE`, equipped with such operations as `infix "<"` and `infix ">="`, representing objects to which a total order relation is applicable. A class that needs an order relation of its own, such as `STRING`, will inherit from `COMPARABLE`.

In its simplest form, _structure inheritance_ carries information about a specific property of a type. By taking advantage of _CRTP_, it is possible to retain at compile time the actual type being used:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename Derived>
    struct some_concept { /*...*/ };
    
    struct foo : some_concept<foo> { /*...*/ };
    
    template <typename Derived>
    void do_something(some_concept<Derived>& p) {
      Derived& d = static_cast<Derived&>(p); // get the actual object back
      
      /*...do something with d, knowing that it models some_concept...*/
    }

Consider the proposed example of types with an order relation, which makes them _comparable_. Knowing that all relational operators can be implemented in terms of _less than_, this looks like a perfect opportunity to use inheritance to provide all four `operators` for the price of one. A naïve attempt at that would look like this:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    class comparable {
    private:
      virtual bool less_than(comparable const& other) const = 0;

    public:
      friend bool operator <(comparable const& lhs, comparable const& rhs) {
        return lhs.less_than(rhs);
      }
      friend bool operator >(comparable const& lhs, comparable const& rhs) {
        return rhs.less_than(lhs);
      }
      friend bool operator <=(comparable const& lhs, comparable const& rhs) {
        return !rhs.less_than(lhs);
      }
      friend bool operator >=(comparable const& lhs, comparable const& rhs) {
        return !lhs.less_than(rhs);
      }
    };
    
    comparable const& max(comparable const& lhs, comparable const& rhs) {
      return lhs.less_than(rhs) ? rhs : lhs;
    }
    
    class foo : public comparable {
    private:
      bool less_than(comparable const& other_comparable) const override {
        foo const& other = dynamic_cast<foo const&>(other_comparable); // throws if not compatible
        /*...*/
      }
    };

This is all kinds of wrong, but the worst of them all is the introduced relationship between all _comparable_ types. Since only the `comparable` base is considered, it is possible to compare apples and oranges only to find out at runtime that this is a logic error &mdash;a `std::complex` is _comparable_ and so is a `std::string`, but one is not necessarily comparable against the other&mdash;. All that can be done to handle a mixed type situation is to check the _dynamic type_ of the arguments, and throw a `std::bad_cast` exception when they are not compatible.

A type safe solution can be implemented using templates. _Comparable_ is not a class after all, but a family of classes:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename Derived>
    class comparable {
    public:
        friend bool operator <(comparable<Derived> const& clhs, comparable<Derived> const& crhs) {
            Derived const& lhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(clhs);
            Derived const& rhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(crhs);
        
            return lhs.less_than(rhs);
        }
        friend bool operator >(comparable<Derived> const& clhs, comparable<Derived> const& crhs) {
            Derived const& lhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(clhs);
            Derived const& rhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(crhs);
        
            return rhs.less_than(lhs);
        }
        friend bool operator <=(comparable<Derived> const& clhs, comparable<Derived> const& crhs) {
            Derived const& lhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(clhs);
            Derived const& rhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(crhs);

            return !rhs.less_than(lhs);
        }
        friend bool operator >=(comparable<Derived> const& clhs, comparable<Derived> const& crhs) {
            Derived const& lhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(clhs);
            Derived const& rhs = static_cast<Derived const&>(crhs);

            return !lhs.less_than(rhs);
        }
    };

    template <typename Derived>
    Derived const& max(comparable<Derived> const& lhs, comparable<Derived> const& rhs) {
        comparable<Derived> const& result = lhs.less_than(rhs) ? rhs : lhs;

        return static_cast<Derived const&>(result);
    }

    class foo : public comparable<foo> {
    public:
        bool less_than(foo const& other) const { /*...*/;  }
    };

It should be noticed how `less_than` had to be made `public` in order for `comparable<foo>` to be able to access it. The base class does not have special access to its derived class &mdash;it is not even supposed to know about it&mdash;. To keep the implementation `private`, `comparable<foo>` would have to be made a `friend` or granted access in some other way.

Additionally, `max` will now preserve the type of the arguments in the return value, instead of just dropping the static type information.

With this approach, any attempt to compare objects of different types will result in a compilation error &mdash;`comparable<std::complex>` is a totally different type than `comparable<std::string>`&mdash;. As a bonus, this alternative makes no use of `virtual` functions nor `dynamic_cast`s, resulting a bit more efficient both in memory usage and execution time. In fact, given that `comparable<T>` is a class with no members, it is a perfect candidate for the [_Empty Base Optimization_](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/ebo "Empty Base Optimization - cppreference.com").

## Facility inheritance

Once again, from [_Object Oriented Software Construction_](http://archive.eiffel.com/doc/manuals/technology/oosc/inheritance-design/section_05.html#HDD20 "OOSC: Facility inheritance"):

> Facility inheritance applies if `A` exists solely for the purpose of providing a set of logically related features for the benefit of heirs such as `B`.

While still on the _comparable_ example, a cleaner solution can be achieved by using `comparable<>` merely to provide additional functionality. Since `comparable<>` knows about the derived class, it can implement said functionality in terms of the interface of the derived class itself:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename Derived>
    class comparable {
    public:
        friend bool operator >(Derived const& lhs, Derived const& rhs) {
            return rhs < lhs;
        }
        friend bool operator <=(Derived const& lhs, Derived const& rhs) {
            return !(rhs < lhs);
        }
        friend bool operator >=(Derived const& lhs, Derived const& rhs) {
            return !(lhs < rhs);
        }
    };

    class foo : private comparable<foo> {
    public:
        friend bool operator <(foo const& lhs, foo const& rhs) {
            /*...*/;
        }
    };

    using std::max;

The inheritance is now private, since it is only an implementation detail as opposed to part of the interface. If the base class provides member functions, those can be reintroduced as `public` via `using` _declarations_.

Finally, there is little point in reimplementing `max` anymore, the one provided by the standard library will do just fine.

These techniques do not limit to `operators`, but they do happen to fit the model nicely &mdash;before you go reinventing the wheel, make sure to check [_Boost.Operators_](http://www.boost.org/libs/utility/operators.htm "Boost.Operators")&mdash;.

# Summary

The _curiously recurring template pattern_ is an idiom in which the base class knows the static type of its derived class, given as a template parameter, allowing the base class to defer the implementation to the derived class.

 - A `class` _declaration_ introduces a name for an incomplete type.
 - A `class` _definition_ completes the named type.
 - Non-`virtual` functions of a `template` class are _instantiated_ when used.
 - _Structure_ and _facility inheritance_ can be modeled with _CRTP_ without loosing static type information.

---

References:

- [Curiously recurring template pattern - _Wikipedia_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Curiously_recurring_template_pattern "Curiously recurring template pattern - Wikipedia")
