Ruminations on the development of [Eggs.Variant](https://github.com/eggs-cpp/variant "eggs-cpp/variant"), a **C++11/14** generic, type-safe, discriminated union.

<!-- pagebreak -->

# Introduction

A [`union`]("http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/union "Union declaration - cppreference.com") is a special class type that can hold only one of its non-static data members at a time. It's just big enough to accommodate the largest of its members.

> **9 [class]/5**
> A _union_ is a class defined with the class-key union; it holds at most one data member at a time (9.5). _[...]_
>
> **9.5 [class.union]/1**
> In a union, at most one of the non-static data members can be active at any time, that is, the value of at most one of the non-static data members can be stored in a union at any time. _[...]_ The size of a union is sufficient to contain the largest of its non-static data members. Each non-static data member is allocated as if it were the sole member of a struct. All non-static data members of a union object have the same address.

In **C++98**, members of a `union` where restricted to trivial object types. For these types, lifetime begins when appropriate storage is obtained, and ends when the storage is reused or released.

> **3.8 [basic.life]/1**
> _[...]_ The lifetime of an object of type `T` begins when:
>
>
> - storage with the proper alignment and size for type `T` is obtained, and
> - if the object has non-trivial initialization, its initialization is complete.
>
> The lifetime of an object of type `T` ends when:
>
> - if `T` is a class type with a non-trivial destructor (12.4), the destructor call starts, or
> - the storage which the object occupies is reused or released.

This special guarantee allows the active member of a `union` to be changed by simply assigning to it, effectively reusing the storage &mdash;that's at least the spirit, if not the letter, of the standard&mdash;.

Furthermore, a `union` does not know which member &mdash;if any&mdash; is active, so its special member functions have to be implemented without that information. Since members are restricted to trivial types, the special member functions can be implemented in terms of the underlying bytes, independently of the active member.

> **9.5 [class.union]/1**
>  _[...]_ An object of a class with a non-trivial constructor (12.1), a non-trivial copy constructor (12.8), a non-trivial destructor (12.4), or a non-trivial copy assignment operator (13.5.3, 12.8) cannot be a member of a union, nor can an array of such objects. _[...]_

In **C++11**, this restriction was lifted; members of a `union` can now be of any object type. Switching between non-trivial members requires explicitly destroying the currently active member, and using placement `new` to construct the newly active member.

> **9.5 [class.union]/4**
> _[Note:_ In general, one must use explicit destructor calls and placement new operators to change the active member of a union. _—end note]_ _[Example:_ Consider an object `u` of a union type `U` having non-static data members `m` of type `M` and `n` of type `N`. If `M` has a non-trivial destructor and `N` has a non-trivial constructor (for instance, if they declare or inherit virtual functions), the active member of `u` can be safely switched from `m` to `n` using the destructor and placement new operator as follows:
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     u.m.~M();
>     new (&u.n) N;
>
> _—end example]_

If a special member function is non-trivial for any of the members, then the `union` special member function will be implicitly defined as _deleted_ when not user-provided.

> **9.5 [class.union]/2**
> _[Note:_ If any non-static data member of a union has a non-trivial default constructor (12.1), copy constructor (12.8), move constructor (12.8), copy assignment operator (12.8), move assignment operator (12.8), or destructor (12.4), the corresponding member function of the union must be user-provided or it will be implicitly deleted (8.4.3) for the union. _—end note]_
>
> **9.5 [class.union]/3**
> _[Example:_ Consider the following union:
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     union U {
>       int i;
>       float f;
>       std::string s;
>     };
>
> Since `std::string` (21.3) declares non-trivial versions of all of the special member functions, `U` will have an implicitly deleted default constructor, copy/move constructor, copy/move assignment operator, and destructor. To use `U`, some or all of these member functions must be user-provided. _-end example]_

These non-trivial member functions can only be provided &mdash;with their usual semantics&mdash; by knowing if a member is active, and then forwarding to it. A _discriminated `union`_ is a `union` or _union-like class_ that is self-aware, that is, it contains some form of identifier that lets it know which member &mdash;if any&mdash; is active. A _discriminated `union`_ can provide all special member functions, trivial or not.

An instance of `eggs::variant<Ts...>` is a _discriminated `union`_ with members of object types `Ts`. It offers a natural interface for switching the active member, and it provides all special member functions with the usual semantics:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    eggs::variants<N, M> u; // u has no active members
    u = M{}; // u has an active member of type M
    u = N{}; // u has an active member of type N, the previous active member was destroyed

    // all special member functions are provided
    using U = eggs::variants<int, float, std::string>;

# Design

The ultimate design goal is to generalize and enhance the _discriminated `union`_ construct, without compromising its functionality. That is, there should be little or no room for choosing:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    struct U {
      union { T0 m0; ...; TN mN; };
      std::size_t which;
    } u;

over:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    using V = eggs::variant<T0, ..., TN>;
    V v;

In particular:

 - The size of `V` shall match that of the corresponding `U`. Any active member of `v` shall be allocated in a region of `V` suitably aligned for the types `T0, ... TN`; the use of additional storage, such as dynamic memory, is not permitted.

 - Well defined semantics of `u` shall be matched or improved by `v`. Undefined behavior, such as referring to a non-active member of `u`, shall not be allowed by the interface of `v`.

 - All special member functions shall be provided by `V` with the expected semantics.

The interface is largely based on that of [`std::experimental::optional<T>`](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/experimental/optional "std::experimental::optional - cppreference.com"), as defined by the [Library Fundamentals TS](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2014/n4082.pdf "C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals"). The conceptual model for `optional<T>` is that of a _discriminated `union`_ of types `nullopt_t` and `T`. The design decisions taken for `optional<T>` easily translate to `variant<Ts...>`, whose conceptual model is that of a _discriminated `union`_ of types `nullvariant_t` and those in `Ts`. The semantics of all special member functions and relational operators, as well as the interface for switching the active member &mdash;via construction, assignment, or emplacement&mdash;, derives from `optional<T>`.

Access to the active member is based on the design of [`std::function`](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/functional/function "std::function - cppreference.com"), which gives back a pointer to the target if queried with the correct target type &mdash;as a poor man's `dynamic_cast`&mdash;. Additionally, it is also possible to obtain a `void` pointer to the active member (if any), which proved useful to simplify the implementation of helper functions.

Finally, helper classes similar to those of [`std::tuple`](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/tuple/tuple "std::tuple - cppreference.com") are provided, as well as index or type based element access &mdash;albeit with surprising semantics, closer to those of a runtime-checked cast&mdash;.

<div div style="padding: 2px 10px; margin-bottom: 20px; background: none repeat scroll 0px 0px rgb(245, 245, 245); border-radius: 5px 5px 5px 5px; border: 1px solid rgb(238, 238, 238); text-align: center;" markdown="1">

The reference documentation can be found [here](http://eggs-cpp.github.io/variant/reference.html "Eggs.Variant - Reference").

</div>

# Implementation

A direct implementation of `variant<Ts>` would use an underlying relaxed `union` as storage:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename ...Ts>
    union storage {
      nullvariant_t nullvariant;
      Ts... members;
    };

However, that's not well formed **C++**, as parameter packs cannot be expanded in that context &mdash;what would the names of the members be, and how would they be referred to&mdash;. Instead, a recursive approach is necessary to build the underlying storage:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename ...Ts>
    union storage;

    template <typename T, typename ...Ts>
    union storage<T, Ts...> {
      nullvariant_t nullvariant;
      T head;
      storage<Ts...> tail;
    };

    template <>
    union storage<> {
      nullvariant_t nullvariant;
    };

Unfortunately, it is not that simple either, given that any non-trivial special member function for a type in `Ts` will result in the corresponding special member function being deleted for `storage`. In order to use it, at the very list the default constructor and the destructor would have to be provided, even though a destructor would be unable to do anything useful.

A simpler implementation, one that was used before **C++** got relaxed `union`s, would be to use raw storage suitable for holding any of the types in `Ts` &mdash;_spoiler alert:_ this will prove to fall short on some fronts&mdash;. The standard even provides a trait to ease the work:

> **20.10.7.6 [meta.trans.other]**
> 
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     template <std::size_t Len, class... Types>
>     struct aligned_union;
> 
>  - _Condition:_ At least one type is provided.
> 
>  - _Comments:_ The member typedef `type` shall be a POD type suitable for use as uninitialized storage for any object whose type is listed in `Types`; its size shall be at least `Len`. The static member `alignment_value` shall be an integral constant of type `std::size_t` whose value is the strictest alignment of all types listed in `Types`.

It should be noted that this trait was already removed once from the working draft &mdash;with the arrival of relaxed `union`s&mdash;, and is now a potential candidate for deprecation. A possible **C++14** replacement would be:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <std::size_t Len, typename ...Types>
    struct aligned_union {
      static constexpr std::size_t alignment_value = std::max({alignof(Types)...});
      struct type {
        alignas(alignment_value) unsigned char _[std::max({Len, sizeof(Types)...})];
      };
    };

With the help from `aligned_union` to use as the storage type, a simplified version of `variant<Ts>` can be implemented as follows:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename ...Ts>
    class variant {
      template <typename T> struct _index_of { /*...*/ }; // 0-based index of T in Ts...

    public:
      static constexpr std::size_t npos = std::size_t(-1);

      variant() noexcept
        : _which{npos}
      {}

      template <typename T>
      variant(T const& v)
        : _which{_index_of<T>::value}
      {
        new (target<T>()) T(v); // Constructs a T in the storage by means of placement new
      }

      /*...*/

      std::size_t which() const noexcept {
        return _which;
      }

      template <typename T>
      T* target() noexcept {
        return _which == _index_of<T>::value ?
          static_cast<T*>(static_cast<void*>(&_storage)) : nullptr;
      }

      template <typename T>
      T const* target() const noexcept {
        return _which == _index_of<T>::value ?
          static_cast<T const*>(static_cast<void const*>(&_storage)) : nullptr;
      }

    private:
      std::size_t _which;
      typename std::aligned_union<0, Ts...>::type _storage;
    };

The special member functions have to dispatch to the active member (if any). Once again, we cannot simply use `switch` to accomplish this &mdash;albeit if we could it would hardly be simple&mdash;, and the immediate replacement would be a recursive implementation:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    struct _destructor {
      template <typename T>
      static void call(void* ptr) {
        static_cast<T*>(ptr)->~T();
      }
    };

    variant<Ts...>::~variant() {
      apply<_destructor, Ts...>(_which, &_storage);
    }

    template <typename F>
    void apply(std::size_t /*which*/, void* /*storage*/) {}

    template <typename F, typename T, typename ...Ts>
    void apply(std::size_t which, void* storage) {
      if (which == 0) { F::template call<T>(storage); }
      else { apply<F, Ts...>(which - 1, storage); }
    }

A flat implementation of `apply` can be achieved by generating a jump table, similar to what a `switch` would do, and then jumping to the appropriate entry:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <typename F, typename ...Ts>
    void apply(std::size_t which, void* storage) {
      using fun_ptr = void(*)(void*);
      static constexpr fun_ptr table[] = {&F::template call<Ts>...};

      if (which < sizeof...(Ts)) { table[which](storage); }
    }

The flat implementation not only results in faster generated code, but also in faster compilation times for large number of types in `Ts` &mdash;your mileage may vary&mdash;.

## Trivially Copyable

A trivially copyable type is a type that can be copied by copying its underlying bits &mdash;i.e. by means of [`std::memcpy`](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/string/byte/memcpy "std::memcpy - cppreference.com")&mdash;.

> **3.9 [basic.types]/2**
> For any object (other than a base-class subobject) of trivially copyable type `T`, whether or not the object holds a valid value of type `T`, the underlying bytes (1.7) making up the object can be copied into an array of `char` or `unsigned char`. If the content of the array of `char` or `unsigned char` is copied back into the object, the object shall subsequently hold its original value. _[...]_
> 
> **3.9 [basic.types]/3**
> For any trivially copyable type `T`, if two pointers to `T` point to distinct `T` objects `obj1` and `obj2`, where neither `obj1` nor `obj2` is a base-class subobject, if the underlying bytes (1.7) making up `obj1` are copied into `obj2`, `obj2` shall subsequently hold the same value as `obj1`. _[...]_

A `union` of trivially copyable members is itself trivially copyable, which makes it candidate for more optimizations than a non-trivially copyable type would be. It follows that a `variant` of trivially copyable types should strive to be trivially copyable too.

> **9 [class]/6**
> A _trivially copyable_ class is a class that:
> 
>  - has no non-trivial copy constructors (12.8),
>  - has no non-trivial move constructors (12.8),
>  - has no non-trivial copy assignment operators (13.5.3, 12.8),
>  - has no non-trivial move assignment operators (13.5.3, 12.8), and
>  - has a trivial destructor (12.4).
> 
>   _[...]_

In order to achieve this, a separate specialization of `variant` has to be selected when all types in `Ts` are trivially copyable. The special member functions enumerated above shall not be user provided for that specialization &mdash;they should either be implicitly provided or explicitly defaulted on its first declaration&mdash;. The implementation will provide implicit definitions for them which will be trivial; copy and move operations will simply copy the underlying bits of the storage as well as the discriminator, the destructor will do nothing.

But there is a catch: a _trivially copyable_ class may not be _copyable_ at all, given that a special member function deleted on its first declaration is trivial. Take, for instance, [`boost::noncopyable`](http://www.boost.org/libs/core/doc/html/core/noncopyable.html "boost::noncopyable") defined as follows:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    class noncopyable {
    protected:
      constexpr noncopyable() = default;
      noncopyable(noncopyable const&) = delete;
      noncopyable& operator=(noncopyable const&) = delete;
      ~noncopyable() = default;
    };

It may come as a surprise that [`std::is_trivially_copyable`](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/types/is_trivially_copyable "std::is_trivially_copyable - cppreference.com") yields `true` for `noncopyable`. It may be even more surprising that an instance of `variant<noncopyable>` can be happily copied, since the deleted member functions of `noncopyable` are not even being used. This is, in fact, a violation of type safety, stemmed from the decision to use untyped raw storage to hold the active member.

## Trivially Destructible

Another important category of types is those that are _trivially destructible_.

> **12.4 [class.dtor]/5**
> _[...]_ A destructor is trivial if it is not user-provided and if:
> 
>  - the destructor is not `virtual`,
>  - all of the direct base classes of its class have trivial destructors, and
>  - for all of the non-static data members of its class that are of class type (or array thereof), each such class has a trivial destructor.
> 
> Otherwise, the destructor is _non-trivial_.

This is particularly important because one of the requirements for a literal type &mdash;those whose instances can be used in a `constexpr` context&mdash; is that of being trivially destructible.

> **3.9 [basic.types]/10**
> A type is a _literal type_ if it is:
> 
>  - _[...]_
>  - a class type (Clause 9) that has all of the following properties:
>    - it has a trivial destructor,
>    - it is an aggregate type (8.5.1) or has at least one `constexpr` constructor or constructor template that is not a copy or move constructor, and
>    - all of its non-static data members and base classes are of non-volatile literal types.

A `union` could be a literal type, providing that at least one of its members is a literal type and the rest of them are trivially destructible. It follows that a `variant` should strive to be a literal type under those conditions too. Yet another specialization of `variant` has to be selected when all types in `Ts` are trivially destructible. It is of little benefit however, since amongst the restrictions on constant expressions is that of casting a `void` pointer to a pointer-to-object:

> **5.19 [expr.const]/2**
> A _conditional-expression_ `e` is a _core constant expression_ unless the evaluation of `e`, following the rules of the abstract machine (1.9), would evaluate one of the following expressions:
> 
>  - _[...]_
>  - a conversion from type _cv_ `void*` to a pointer-to-object type;
>  - _[...]_

Once again, the decision to use untyped raw storage is a limitation to fully implement a generic _discriminated `union`_ on par with what a manually implemented one could achieve.

# What Lies Ahead

An implementation based in raw storage &mdash;while giving a great bang for the buck&mdash; does not hold when pushed to the limit. A generalized, type-safe, _discriminated `union`_ necessarily takes a `union` as underlying storage if it is to provide as much of the functionality of a `union` as possible.
