The [Zen of Python][zen-of-python] tell us that _Explicit is better than Implicit_. This is good advice for any and all languages, but what are the implications in the _C++_ lands? There is one particular _C++_ feature that relates directly to that advice; one important enough that grants on its own the introduction of a keyword. That feature is _user-defined conversions_ and that keyword is `explicit`.

[zen-of-python]: http://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0020/ "PEP 20 -- The Zen of Python"

<!-- pagebreak -->

# Conversions

Type conversion is an implicit or explicit operation that changes an instance of one type into another. _C_ defines a number of _standard conversions_, including:

- **Numeric promotions**, applied when a numeric value is used in a context where a numeric value of a larger type is expected. Those promotions are _integral promotion_, and _floating point promotion_. A particular case is that of built-in arithmetic operators, which do not accept types smaller than `int` as arguments, and integral promotions are automatically applied. This conversion always preserves the value.

- **Numeric conversions**, applied when a numeric value is used in a context where a numeric value of a different type is expected, and a promotion cannot be applied. Those conversions are _integral conversions_, _floating point conversions_, _floating - integral conversions_, _pointer conversions_, and _boolean conversions_. Unlike the promotions, numeric conversions may change the values, with potential loss of precision.

- **Lvalue transformations**, applied when an _lvalue_ argument is used in context where an _rvalue_ is expected. Those transformations are _lvalue to rvalue conversion_, _array to pointer conversion_, and _function to pointer conversion_. This is the type conversion applied to all function arguments when passed by value, and it is customary referred to as argument [_decay_][std-decay].

_C++_ inherits all of these and adds a few of its own &mdash;the standard devotes an entire clause to _standard conversions_,  **[Clause 4]**&mdash;. In the spirit of supporting user-defined types as first class citizens, it allows said user-defined types to specify ways in which they can be converted from/to a different type. Those conversions are unsurprisingly known as _user-defined conversions_:

> **[12.3/1]**
> Type conversions of class objects can be specified by constructors and by conversion functions. These conversions are called _user-defined conversions_ and are used for implicit type conversions (Clause 4), for initialization (8.5), and for explicit type conversions (5.4, 5.2.9).
>
> **[12.3/4]**
> At most one user-defined conversion (constructor or conversion function) is implicitly applied to a single value.
> _[ Example:_
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     struct X {
>       operator int();
>     };
>     
>     struct Y {
>       operator X();
>     };
>     
>     Y a;
>     int b = a; // error
>                // a.operator X().operator int() not tried
>     int c = X(a); // OK: a.operator X().operator int()
>
> _—end example ]_

_User-defined conversions_ come in two flavors: conversion by construction, and conversion functions. The former is used to declare that a type `T` can be converted **from** a type `U`, while the later is used to declare that a type `T` can be converted **to** a type `U`. Both forms are achieved by the definition of _special member functions_, which means that conversion operations cannot be added to a class after it has been defined&mdash;i.e., _user-defined conversions_ are intrusive&mdash;.

[std-decay]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/types/decay "std::decay - cppreference.com"

## Conversion by Construction

The rules are simple, any non-`explicit` constructor is a _converting constructor_:

> **[12.3.1/1]**
> A constructor declared without the _function-specifier_ `explicit` specifies a conversion from the types of its parameters to the type of its class. Such a constructor is called a _converting constructor_. _[ Example:_
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     struct X {
>       X(int);
>       X(const char*, int =0);
>       X(int, int);
>     };
>     
>     void f(X arg) {
>       X a = 1; // a = X(1)
>       X b = "Jessie"; // b = X("Jessie",0)
>       a = 2; // a = X(2)
>       f(3); // f(X(3))
>       f({1, 2}); // f(X(1,2))
>     }
>
> _—end example ]_

It used to be the case, before the introduction of [_list-initialization_][list-initialization], that a _converting constructor_ was any non-`explicit` constructor that could be called with a single argument. Note that this is broader than constructors with a single parameter, as it also includes constructors with more than one parameters where at least all but one specify a default argument &mdash;and the grammar requires that parameters without default arguments precede those with default arguments&mdash;.

With the advent of [_list-initialization_][list-initialization], a _converting constructor_ can be called with more than just one argument. _List-initialization_ is initialization of an object or reference from a _braced-init-list_. A _braced-init-list_ is a syntactic construct that aggregates any number of arguments within braces.

The following example from the standard library, one of [`std::complex` constructors][std-complex-constructor], has it all:

> **[26.4.4]**
> **`complex` member functions**
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     template<class T> constexpr complex(const T& re = T(), const T& im = T());
>
>  - _Effects_: Constructs an object of class `complex`.
>  - _Postcondition_: `real() == re && imag() == im`.
>
> _[...]_

Given `void f(std::complex<float> arg){}`:

- It is a _default constructor_, since it can be invoked with no arguments and default arguments will be used for both the real and imaginary part. _e.g.,_ `f(std::complex<float>{});`.
- It is a _converting constructor_, since it is not `explicit`.
  - It is a _converting constructor_ from `T`, since it can be invoked with one argument and the default argument will be used for the imaginary part. _e.g.,_ `f(1.f);`,
  - It is a _converting constructor_ from a _braced-init-list_ of two elements &mdash;or zero or one, given the default arguments&mdash;. _e.g.,_ `f({1.f, 0.f})`.

[std-complex-constructor]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/numeric/complex/complex "std::complex::complex - cppreference.com"

### `explicit` constructors

There are no such things as _`explicit` converting constructors_, because there is no need for them to be. The language behaves exactly as one would expect them to if they existed &mdash;that is, they are only invoked when _explicitly_ requested&mdash;:

> **[12.3.1/2]**
> An explicit constructor constructs objects just like non-explicit constructors, but does so only where the direct-initialization syntax (8.5) or where casts (5.2.9, 5.4) are explicitly used. A default constructor may be an explicit constructor; such a constructor will be used to perform default-initialization or value-initialization (8.5). _[ Example:_
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     struct Z {
>       explicit Z();
>       explicit Z(int);
>       explicit Z(int, int);
>     };
>     
>     Z a; // OK: default-initialization performed
>     Z a1 = 1; // error: no implicit conversion
>     Z a3 = Z(1); // OK: direct initialization syntax used
>     Z a2(1); // OK: direct initialization syntax used
>     Z* p = new Z(1); // OK: direct initialization syntax used
>     Z a4 = (Z)1; // OK: explicit cast used
>     Z a5 = static_cast<Z>(1); // OK: explicit cast used
>     Z a6 = { 3, 4 }; // error: no implicit conversion
>     
> _—end example ]_

### A note on _list-initialization_

_List-initialization_ can be used in several places where an object is expected &mdash;notably as function arguments and in `return` statements&mdash;. There is nothing special nor new about that, it is just another context in which _implicit conversions_ can occur. There **is** a lot that is special about it, but that's subject for another tale...

## Conversion Functions

A _conversion function_ is a special member function named `operator T` where `T` is a type and that has no parameters other than the implicit object parameter. There is no return type in the declaration, as the return type is the type to which we are converting to, namely `T`. This leaves function types and array types out, since they cannot be returned from a function &mdash;although references to those types can&mdash;.

> **[12.3.2/1]**
> A member function of a class `X` having no parameters with a name of the form
>
>     conversion-function-id:
>       operator conversion-type-id
>
>     conversion-type-id:
>       type-specifier-seq conversion-declarator-opt
>
>     conversion-declarator:
>       ptr-operator conversion-declarator-opt
>
> specifies a conversion from `X` to the type specified by the _conversion-type-id_. Such functions are called conversion functions. No return type can be specified. If a conversion function is a member function, the type of the conversion function (8.3.5) is “function taking no parameter returning _conversion-type-id_”. A conversion function is never used to convert a (possibly cv-qualified) object to the (possibly cv-qualified) same object type (or a reference to it), to a (possibly cv-qualified) base class of that type (or a reference to it), or to (possibly cv-qualified) void.
> _[ Example:_
> 
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     struct X {
>       operator int();
>     };
>     
>     void f(X a) {
>       int i = int(a);
>       i = (int)a;
>       i = a;
>     }
>
> In all three cases the value assigned will be converted by `X::operator int()`. _—end example ]_

Some examples from the standard library are:

 - [`std::atomic<T>`][std-atomic-operator_T] which is implicitly convertible to `T`,
 - [`std::reference_wrapper<T>`][std-reference_wrapper-get] which is implicitly convertible to `T&`,
 - [`std::unique_ptr<T>`][std-unique_ptr-operator_bool] and [`std::shared_ptr<T>`][std-shared_ptr-operator_bool] which &mdash;just like plain pointers&mdash; are converted to `false` when they have a null pointer value, and are converted to `true` otherwise.

[std-reference_wrapper-get]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/utility/functional/reference_wrapper/get "std::reference_wrapper::get, std::reference_wrapper::operator T& - cppreference.com"
[std-atomic-operator_T]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/atomic/atomic/operator_T "std::atomic::operator T() - cppreference.com"
[std-unique_ptr-operator_bool]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/unique_ptr/operator_bool "std::unique_ptr::operator bool - cppreference.com"
[std-shared_ptr-operator_bool]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/memory/shared_ptr/operator_bool "std::shared_ptr::operator bool - cppreference.com"

### `explicit` conversion functions

An _`explicit` conversion function_ is a _conversion function_ that is declared using the `explicit` specifier.

> **[12.3.2/2]**
> A conversion function may be explicit (7.1.2), in which case it is only considered as a user-defined conversion for direct-initialization (8.5). Otherwise, user-defined conversions are not restricted to use in assignments and initializations. _[ Example:_
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     class Y { };
>     struct Z {
>       explicit operator Y() const;
>     };
>     
>     void h(Z z) {
>       Y y1(z); // OK: direct-initialization
>       Y y2 = z; // ill-formed: copy-initialization
>       Y y3 = (Y)z; // OK: cast notation
>     }
>     
>     void g(X a, X b) {
>       int i = (a) ? 1+a : 0;
>       int j = (a&&b) ? a+b : i;
>       if (a) {
>       }
>     }
>
> _—end example ]_

An _`explicit` conversion function_ is not considered in a context where _implicit conversions_ happens, thus restricting the conversion from participating in unwanted expressions. Consider a conversion from a user-defined class `X` to `bool`. Given that `bool` is an _integral_ type, if said conversion function is not `explicit` then suddenly a value of type `X` could participate in all kinds of integral expressions. While it may make sense for an object representing a file to convert to `false` when said file is not open, it is utterly senseless to add files or to compare files using relational operators.

It may seem at first that while _`explicit` conversion functions_ solve the issue, they incidentally impose additional verbosity in achieving the intended semantics &mdash;for instance, by requiring one to write `if (static_cast<bool>(e))` instead of the more idiomatic `if (e)`&mdash;. However, the notion of _contextual conversions_ was introduced so that certain statements behave _as if_ the conversion were _explicitly_ requested.

> **[4/4]**
> Certain language constructs require that an expression be converted to a Boolean value. An expression `e` appearing in such a context is said to be _contextually converted to `bool`_ and is well-formed if and only if the declaration `bool t(e);` is well-formed, for some invented temporary variable `t`(8.5).
>
> **[4/5]**
> Certain language constructs require conversion to a value having one of a specified set of types appropriate to the construct. An expression `e` of class type `E` appearing in such a context is said to be _contextually implicitly converted to_ a specified type `T` and is well-formed if and only if `e` can be implicitly converted to a type `T` that is determined as follows: `E` is searched for conversion functions whose return type is _cv_ `T` or reference to _cv_ `T` such that `T` is allowed by the context. There shall be exactly one such `T`.

### A note on `bool`

Before _`explicit` conversion functions_ where introduced in _C++11_, conversions to `bool` presented a real problem &mdash;as exemplified earlier&mdash;. Components of the _IOStreams_ subset of the standard library initially tackled this problem by defining a conversion to `void*` instead, for which there is a standard conversion to `bool`. This prevents its participation in arithmetic expressions, but it opens the door to nonsense code such as `delete std::cout`. A solution using _member pointers_ was then born, which conveniently cannot be the operand in a `delete` expression, and it is known as the &mdash;now obsolete&mdash; [_safe bool idiom_][safe-bool-idiom].

[safe-bool-idiom]: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms/Safe_bool "More C++ Idioms/Safe bool"

# Summary

User-defined types in _C++_ can specify _user-defined conversions_ akin to the _standard conversions_ for fundamental types. 

- Conversion operations are intrusive to either the source type or the target type of the conversion.
- _Converting constructors_ specify a conversion **from** a different type, _conversion functions_ specify a conversion **to** a different type.
- Every constructor is a _converting constructor_ unless defined `explicit`.
- Conversion functions defined `explicit` participate in certain language constructs, where they are known as _contextual conversions_.

[list-initialization]: http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/list_initialization "list initialization - cppreference.com"

---

References:

- [Type conversion - _Wikipedia_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_conversion "Type conversion")
- [Implicit conversions - _cppreference.com_](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/implicit_cast "Implicit conversions")
- [What is the purpose of the explicit keyword?, C++ FAQ - _Parashift_](http://www.parashift.com/c++-faq/explicit-ctors.html "What is the purpose of the explicit keyword?, C++ FAQ")
- [More C++ Idioms/Safe bool - _Wikibooks_](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms/Safe_bool "More C++ Idioms/Safe bool")
