In the beginning there was no `bool`. And **C++** said "let there be `bool`", and there was `bool`...

The _Boolean_ data type is an integral type with only two values: `true` and `false`, intended to represent the truth values of logic and _Boolean algebra_. With only two values, what can possibly go wrong?

<!-- pagebreak -->

# Genesis

The initial implementations of the **C** language (1972) provided no _Boolean_ type, and to this day _Boolean_ values are commonly represented by `int`s in **C** programs. The comparison operators are defined to return an `int`, either `0` for _false_ or _non_-`0` for _true_. The same convention is assumed by the logical operators and condition-testing statements.

After `enums` were added to the _ANSI_ version of **C** (1989), many programmers got used to defining their own _Boolean_ types as such, for readability reasons. However, enumerated types are equivalent to integers according to the language standards; so the effective identity between _Booleans_ and integers is still valid for **C** programs.

**C++** (standardized in 1998) has a separate _Boolean_ data type `bool`, but with automatic conversions from scalar and pointer values that are very similar to those of **C** &mdash;and if you think a builtin `bool` type is not needed, [think again][gotw-26]&mdash;.

**C99** added a _Boolean_ data type `_Bool`. Additionally, the standard requires that macros are defined in the `<stdbool.h>` header to alias the type as `bool`, as well as providing macros for `true` and `false`.

> **[7.18/1]**
> The header `<stdbool.h>` defines four macros.
>
> **[7.18/2]**
> The macro `bool` expands to `_Bool`.
>
> **[7.18/3]**
> The remaining three macros are suitable for use in `#if` preprocessing directives.  They are `true` which expands to the integer constant 1, `false` which expands to the integer constant 0, and `__bool_true_false_are_defined` which expands to the integer constant 1.
>
> **[7.18/4]**
> Notwithstanding the provisions of 7.1.3, a program may undefine and perhaps then redefine the macros `bool`, `true`, and `false`.

**[7.1.3]** states that once `<stdbool.h>` is included, the macro names defined in it are reserved for use only as specified, and that declaring or defining entities with those names results in undefined behavior.

Even more, the _future library directions_ section reads:

> **[7.31.9/1]**
> The ability to undefine and perhaps then redefine the macros `bool`, `true`, and `false` is an obsolescent feature.

[gotw-26]: http://www.gotw.ca/gotw/026.htm "GotW #26: Bool"

# A Partial Specialization Gone Wrong

A _bit_ is enough to store the possible values of `bool`. However, there is no type with a size less than that of `char`, which has to be at least _8 bits_ long. This means that every `bool` will waste at least _7 bits_. If we had several `bool`s to store, we could pack them together into one of the other _integral types_ and save a considerable amount of space. That is the idea behind the partial specialization of `std::vector` of `bool`s.

> **[23.3.8]**
> To optimize space allocation, a specialization of vector for `bool` elements is provided:
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     namespace std {
>       template <class Allocator> class vector<bool, Allocator> {
>       public:
>         // types:
>         typedef bool const_reference;
>         /*...*/
>         // bit reference:
>         class reference {
>           friend class vector;
>           reference() noexcept;
>         public:
>           ~reference();
>           operator bool() const noexcept;
>           reference& operator=(const bool x) noexcept;
>           reference& operator=(const reference& x) noexcept;
>           void flip() noexcept; // flips the bit
>         };
>         /*...*/
>       };
>     }

The problem with this particular specialization is that `std::vector<bool>` is not really a `std::vector`, and in fact it is not even a _container_!

### Contiguous Storage

A `std::vector<T>` will store its elements contiguously in memory, as long as its elements are not `bool`s:
  
  > **[23.3.7.1/1]**
  > A `vector` is a sequence container that supports random access iterators. In addition, it supports (amortized) constant time insert and erase operations at the end; insert and erase in the middle take linear time. Storage management is handled automatically, though hints can be given to improve efficiency. The elements of a vector are stored contiguously, meaning that if `v` is a `vector<T, Allocator>` where `T` is some type other than `bool`, then it obeys the identity `&v[n] == &v[0] + n` for all `0 <= n < v.size()`.

While for a `std::vector<bool>`:

  > **[23.3.8/3]**
  > There is no requirement that the data be stored as a contiguous allocation of `bool` values. A space-optimized representation of bits is recommended instead.

### General Container Requirements

A `std::vector<T>` is a container, as long as its elements are not `bool`s:

> **[23.3.7.1/2]**
> A `vector` satisfies all of the requirements of a container and of a reversible container (given in two tables in 23.2) _[...]_
>
> **[23.2.1/4]**
> In Tables 96 and 97, `X` denotes a container class containing objects of type `T` _[...]_
> 
> Expression            | Return type
> :-------------------- | :-------------------
> `X::reference`        | lvalue of `T`
> `X::const_reference`  | const lvalue of `T`

While for a `std::vector<bool>`:

> **[23.3.8/4]**
> `reference` is a class that simulates the behavior of references of a single bit in `vector<bool>`. The conversion operator returns `true` when the bit is set, and `false` otherwise. The assignment operator sets the bit when the argument is (convertible to) `true` and clears it otherwise.

...and `const_reference` is just plain `bool`.

### Allocator-Aware Container Requirements

A `std::vector<T>` is an allocator-aware container, as long as its elements are not `bool`s:

> **[23.3.7.1/2]**
> A `vector` satisfies all of the requirements _[...]_ of an allocator-aware container (Table 99).
>
> **[23.2.1/3]**
> For the components affected by this subclause that declare an `allocator_type`, objects stored in these components shall be constructed using the `allocator_traits<allocator_type>::construct` function and destroyed using the `allocator_traits<allocator_type>::destroy` function (20.8.8.2). These functions are called only for the container’s element type, not for internal types used by the container. _[ Note:_ This means, for example, that a node-based container might need to construct nodes containing aligned buffers and call `construct` to place the element into the buffer. _—end note ]_

While for a `std::vector<bool>`:

> **[23.3.8/2]**
> _[...]_ operations dealing with the `bool` value type map to bit values in the container storage and `allocator_traits::construct` (20.8.8.2) is not used to construct these values.

## Wrapping up

The committee intended `std::vector<bool>` to moonlight as a dynamic counterpart to `std::bitset`, and the result is a partial specialization that can't fulfill either of its jobs. Since bits are not addressable, a data structure of packed `bool`s &mdash;dynamic or not&mdash; will never be a _container_. For example, the following code snippet will work for every _mutable container_, but not for a `std::vector<bool>`:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    template <class Container>
    void test(Container& c)
    {
      for (auto& e : c) {
        // do something to e
      }
    }

A dynamic counterpart to `std::bitset` would better be named `std::dynamic_bitset` and not `std::vector<bool>`. But even if that happens, due to backwards compatibility we might never get `std::vector<bool>` back. Meanwhile, the space optimization of `std::vector<bool>` is optional &mdash;yet not the odd interface&mdash;, so [_Boost.Dynamic_Bitset_][boost-dynamic_bitset] might be a better alternative.

[boost-dynamic_bitset]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/release/libs/dynamic_bitset/dynamic_bitset.html "dynamic_bitset<Block, Allocator>"

# `Tribool`
## or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Overloaded Logical Operators

There is more in logic than just _Boolean algebra_. A [_many-valued logic_][many-valued_logic] system has more than just two truth values. In particular, a [_three-valued logic_][three-valued_logic] system has three truth values: _true_, _false_ and some _indeterminate_ third value.

The fundamental data type of a _three-valued logic_ system is the _tribool_ &mdash;a different beast than `std::optional<bool>`&mdash;, and [_Boost.Tribool_][boost-tribool] is an implementation of it. Quoting from the documentation:

> `tribool` supports the 3-state logic operators `!` (negation), `&&` (logical-and), and `||` (logical-or), with `bool` and `tribool` values. For instance:
>
>     [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
>     tribool x = some_op();
>     tribool y = some_other_op();
>     if (x && y) {
>       // both x and y are true
>     }
>     else if (!(x && y)) {
>       // either x or y is false
>     }
>     else {
>       // neither x nor y is false, but we don't know that both are true
>     
>       if (x || y) {
>         // either x or y is true
>       }
>     }

The catch is that those operators are overloaded, and overloaded operators are just regular functions. As such, overloaded operators `&&` and `||` loose their special _short-circuit evaluation_ semantics. Consider the following scenario:

    [[syntax: cpp, gutter: false; toolbar: false;]]
    struct X {
      boost::tribool hi_there() const { /*...*/ }
    };

    X *x = nullptr;
    if (x != nullptr && x->hi_there()) { // boom!
      /*...*/
    }

The problem here is that `boost::tribool` is an argument to `&&`, so the overloaded operator `&&` is called instead of the builtin operator. As with any ordinary function, each parameter shall be initialized with its corresponding argument &mdash;the evaluation order is indeterminated, but there is a more pressing issue&mdash;. The right hand side argument, `x->some_op()`, will be evaluated regardless of the value of the left hand side argument &mdash;which might not have been evaluated yet&mdash; and it will be dereferencing a _null pointer_ each time `x != nullptr` does not hold. It should be noted that the offending expression makes no mention of `boost::tribool`, which would be in itself a red flag.

Syntax sugar is nice to have, but not when the cost to pay is that of deviant semantics.

[many-valued_logic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Many-valued_logic "Many-valued logic - Wikipedia"
[three-valued_logic]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three-valued_logic "Three-valued logic - Wikipedia"
[boost-tribool]: http://www.boost.org/doc/libs/release/doc/html/tribool.html "Boost.Tribool"

# _Boolean_ Conversions

An _implicit conversion_ to `bool` is another construct involving `bool` that is not without issues &mdash;issues that were covered by a previous episode&mdash;. What follows is an excerpt from [Episode Five: Explicit is Better than Implicit][episode-five]:

> Consider a conversion from a user-defined class `X` to `bool`. Given that `bool` is an _integral_ type, if said conversion function is not `explicit` then suddenly a value of type `X` could participate in all kinds of integral expressions. While it may make sense for an object representing a file to convert to `false` when said file is not open, it is utterly senseless to add files or to compare files using relational operators.
> 
> _[...]_
>
> Before _`explicit` conversion functions_ where introduced in _C++11_, conversions to `bool` presented a real problem &mdash;as exemplified earlier&mdash;. Components of the _IOStreams_ subset of the standard library initially tackled this problem by defining a conversion to `void*` instead, for which there is a standard conversion to `bool`. This prevents its participation in arithmetic expressions, but it opens the door to nonsense code such as `delete std::cout`. A solution using _member pointers_ was then born, which conveniently cannot be the operand in a `delete` expression, and it is known as the &mdash;now obsolete&mdash; [_safe bool idiom_][safe-bool-idiom].

[episode-five]: http://talesofcpp.fusionfenix.com/post-7/episode-five-explicit-is-better-than-implicit "Episode Five: Explicit is Better than Implicit - Tales of C++"
[safe-bool-idiom]: https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/More_C%2B%2B_Idioms/Safe_bool "More C++ Idioms/Safe bool"

# Summary

The _Boolean_ data type in _C++_ is `bool` and its possible truth values are `true` and `false`.

- `bool` is an _integral_ type.
- A `std::vector<bool>` does not provide the guarantees of a `std::vector` nor of a _container_. Generic algorithms may fail for that particular partial specialization.
- Overloaded logical operators `&&` and `||` do not have _short-circuit evaluation_ semantics.
- Types with an _implicit-conversion_ to `bool` can participate in all kinds of integral expressions.

---

References:

- [Boolean data type - _Wikipedia_](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boolean_data_type#C.2C_C.2B.2B.2C_Objective-C.2C_Awk.2C_Perl "Boolean data type - Wikipedia")
- [std::vector&lt;bool&gt; - _cppreference.com_](http://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/container/vector_bool "std::vector&lt;bool&gt; - cppreference.com")
- [Using Standard Containers - _Guru of the Week_](http://www.gotw.ca/gotw/050.htm "GotW #50: Using Standard Containers")
- [On vector&lt;bool&gt; &mdash; Howard Hinnant - _Standard C++_](http://isocpp.org/blog/2012/11/on-vectorbool "On vector&lt;bool&gt; &mdash; Howard Hinnant : Standard C++")
